                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                FEBRUARY
                                1659-60

February 1st.  In the morning went to my office where afterwards the old
man brought me my letters from the carrier.  At noon I went home and dined
with my wife on pease porridge and nothing else.  After that I went to the
Hall and there met with Mr. Swan and went with him to Mr. Downing's
Counsellor, who did put me in very little hopes about the business between
Mr. Downing and Squib, and told me that Squib would carry it against him,
at which I was much troubled, and with him went to Lincoln's Inn and there
spoke with his attorney, who told me the day that was appointed for the
trial.  From thence I went to Sir Harry Wright's and got him to give me
his hand for the L60 which I am to-morrow to receive from Mr. Calthrop and
from thence to Mrs. Jem and spoke with Madam Scott and her husband who did
promise to have the thing for her neck done this week.  Thence home and
took Gammer East, and James the porter, a soldier, to my Lord's lodgings,
who told me how they were drawn into the field to-day, and that they were
ordered to march away to-morrow to make room for General Monk; but they
did shut their Colonel Fitch, and the rest of the officers out of the
field, and swore they would not go without their money, and if they would
not give it them, they would go where they might have it, and that was the
City.  So the Colonel went to the Parliament, and commanded what money
could be got, to be got against to-morrow for them, and all the rest of
the soldiers in town, who in all places made a mutiny this day, and do
agree together.  Here I took some bedding to send to Mrs. Ann for her to
lie in now she hath her fits of the ague.  Thence I went to Will's and
staid like a fool there and played at cards till 9 o'clock and so came
home, where I found Mr. Hunt and his wife who staid and sat with me till
10 and so good night.

2d.  Drank at Harper's with Doling, and so to my office, where I found all
the officers of the regiments in town, waiting to receive money that their
soldiers might go out of town, and what was in the Exchequer they had.  At
noon after dining at home I called at Harper's for Doling, and he and I
met with Luellin and drank with him at the Exchequer at Charing Cross, and
thence he and I went to the Temple to Mr. Calthrop's chamber, and from
thence had his man by water to London Bridge to Mr. Calthrop, a grocer,
and received L60 for my Lord.  In our way we talked with our waterman,
White, who told us how the watermen had lately been abused by some that
had a desire to get in to be watermen to the State, and had lately
presented an address of nine or ten thousand hands to stand by this
Parliament, when it was only told them that it was to a petition against
hackney coaches; and that to-day they had put out another to undeceive the
world and to clear themselves, and that among the rest Cropp, my waterman
and one of great practice, was one that did cheat them thus.  After I had
received the money we went to the Bridge Tavern and drank a quart of wine
and so back by water, landing Mr. Calthrop's man at the Temple and we went
homewards, but over against Somerset House, hearing the noise of guns, we
landed and found the Strand full of soldiers.  So I took my money and went
to Mrs. Johnson, my Lord's sempstress, and giving her my money to lay up,
Doling and I went up stairs to a window, and looked out and see the foot
face the horse and beat them back, and stood bawling and calling in the
street for a free Parliament and money.  By and by a drum was heard to
beat a march coming towards them, and they got all ready again and faced
them, and they proved to be of the same mind with them; and so they made a
great deal of joy to see one another.  After all this, I took my money,
and went home on foot and laying up my money, and changing my stockings
and shoes, I this day having left off my great skirt suit, and put on my
white suit with silver lace coat, and went over to Harper's, where I met
with W. Simons, Doling, Luellin and three merchants, one of which had
occasion to use a porter, so they sent for one, and James the soldier
came, who told us how they had been all day and night upon their guard at
St. James's, and that through the whole town they did resolve to stand to
what they had began, and that to-morrow he did believe they would go into
the City, and be received there.  After all this we went to a sport
called, selling of a horse for a dish of eggs and herrings, and sat
talking there till almost twelve o'clock and then parted, they were to go
as far as Aldgate.  Home and to bed.

3rd.  Drank my morning draft at Harper's, and was told there that the
soldiers were all quiet upon promise of pay.  Thence to St. James's Park,
and walked there to my place for my flageolet and then played a little, it
being a most pleasant morning and sunshine.  Back to Whitehall, where in
the guard-chamber I saw about thirty or forty 'prentices of the City, who
were taken at twelve o'clock last night and brought prisoners hither.
Thence to my office, where I paid a little more money to some of the
soldiers under Lieut.-Col. Miller (who held out the Tower against the
Parliament after it was taken away from Fitch by the Committee of Safety,
and yet he continued in his office).  About noon Mrs. Turner came to speak
with me, and Joyce, and I took them and shewed them the manner of the
Houses sitting, the doorkeeper very civilly opening the door for us.
Thence with my cozen Roger Pepys,

     [Roger Pepys, son of Talbot Pepys of Impington, a barrister of the
     Middle Temple, M.P.  for Cambridge, 1661-78, and Recorder of that
     town, 1660-88.  He married, for the third time, Parnell, daughter
     and heiress of John Duke, of Workingham, co.  Suffolk, and this was
     the wedding for which the posy ring was required.]

it being term time, we took him out of the Hall to Priors, the Rhenish
wine-house, and there had a pint or two of wine and a dish of anchovies,
and bespoke three or four dozen bottles of wine for him against his
wedding.  After this done he went away, and left me order to call and pay
for all that Mrs. Turner would have.  So we called for nothing more there,
but went and bespoke a shoulder of mutton at Wilkinson's to be roasted as
well as it could be done, and sent a bottle of wine home to my house.  In
the meantime she and I and Joyce went walking all over White Hall, whither
General Monk was newly come, and we saw all his forces march by in very
good plight and stout officers.  Thence to my house where we dined, but
with a great deal of patience, for the mutton came in raw, and so we were
fain to stay the stewing of it.  In the meantime we sat studying a Posy

     [It is supposed that the fashion of having mottoes inscribed on
     rings was of Roman origin.  In the fourteenth and fifteenth
     centuries the posy was inscribed on the outside of the ring, and in
     the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was placed inside.  A
     small volume was published in 1674, entitled "Love's Garland: or
     Posies for Rings, Handkerchers and Gloves, and such pretty tokens
     that Lovers send their Loves."]

for a ring for her which she is to have at Roger Pepys his wedding. After
dinner I left them and went to hear news, but only found that the
Parliament House was most of them with Monk at White Hall, and that in his
passing through the town he had many calls to him for a free Parliament,
but little other welcome.  I saw in the Palace Yard how unwilling some of
the old soldiers were yet to go out of town without their money, and swore
if they had it not in three days, as they were promised, they would do
them more mischief in the country than if they had staid here; and that is
very likely, the country being all discontented.  The town and guards are
already full of Monk's soldiers. I returned, and it growing dark I and
they went to take a turn in the park, where Theoph. (who was sent for to
us to dinner) outran my wife and another poor woman, that laid a pot of
ale with me that she would outrun her.  After that I set them as far as
Charing Cross, and there left them and my wife, and I went to see Mrs.
Ann, who began very high about a flock bed I sent her, but I took her
down.  Here I played at cards till 9 o'clock.  So home and to bed.

4th.  In the morning at my lute an hour, and so to my office, where I
staid expecting to have Mr. Squib come to me, but he did not.  At noon
walking in the Hall I found Mr. Swan and got him and Captain Stone
together, and there advised about Mr. Downing's business.  So to Will's,
and sat there till three o'clock and then to Mr. Swan's, where I found his
wife in very genteel mourning for her father, and took him out by water to
the Counsellor at the Temple, Mr. Stephens, and from thence to Gray's Inn,
thinking to speak with Sotherton Ellis, but found him not, so we met with
an acquaintance of his in the walks, and went and drank, where I ate some
bread and butter, having ate nothing all day, while they were by chance
discoursing of Marriot, the great eater, so that I was, I remember,
ashamed to eat what I would have done.  Here Swan shewed us a ballad to
the tune of Mardike which was most incomparably wrote in a printed hand,
which I borrowed of him, but the song proved but silly, and so I did not
write it out.  Thence we went and leaving Swan at his master's, my Lord
Widdrington, I met with Spicer, Washington, and D. Vines in Lincoln's Inn
Court, and they were buying of a hanging jack to roast birds on of a
fellow that was there selling of some.  I was fain to slip from there and
went to Mrs. Crew's to her and advised about a maid to come and be with
Mrs. Jem while her maid is sick, but she could spare none.  Thence to Sir
Harry Wright's, but my lady not being within I spoke to Mrs. Carter about
it, who will get one against Monday.  So with a link boy

     [Links were torches of tow or pitch to light the way.  Ed.]

to Scott's, where Mrs. Ann was in a heat, but I spoke not to her, but told
Mrs. Jem what I had done, and after that went home and wrote letters into
the country by the post, and then played awhile on my lute, and so done,
to supper and then to bed.  All the news to-day is, that the Parliament
this morning voted the House to be made up four hundred forthwith.  This
day my wife killed her turkeys that Mr. Sheply gave her, that came out of
Zealand with my Lord, and could not get her m'd Jane by no means at any
time to kill anything.

5th,(Lord's day).  In the morning before church time Mr. Hawly, who had
for this day or two looked something sadly, which methinks did speak
something in his breast concerning me, came to me telling me that he was
out L24 which he could not tell what was become of, and that he do
remember that he had such a sum in a bag the other day, and could not tell
what he did with it, at which I was very sorry but could not help him.  In
the morning to Mr. Gunning, where a stranger, an old man, preached a good
honest sermon upon "What manner of love is this that we should be called
the sons of God."  After sermon I could not find my wife, who promised to
be at the gate against my coming out, and waited there a great while; then
went to my house and finding her gone I returned and called at the
Chequers, thinking to dine at the ordinary with Mr. Chetwind and Mr.
Thomas, but they not being there I went to my father and found her there,
and there I dined.  To their church in the afternoon, and in Mrs. Turner's
pew my wife took up a good black hood and kept it.  A stranger preached a
poor sermon, and so read over the whole book of the story of Tobit.  After
sermon home with Mrs. Turner, staid with her a little while, then she went
into the court to a christening and we to my father's, where I wrote some
notes for my brother John to give to the Mercers' to-morrow, it being the
day of their apposition. After supper home, and before going to bed I
staid writing of this day its passages, while a drum came by, beating of a
strange manner of beat, now and then a single stroke, which my wife and I
wondered at, what the meaning of it should be.  This afternoon at church I
saw Dick Cumberland newly come out of the country from his living, but did
not speak to him.

6th.  Before I went to my office I went to Mr. Crew's and paid Mr. Andrews
the same L60 that he had received of Mr. Calthrop the last week. So back
to Westminster and walked with him thither, where we found the soldiers
all set in the Palace Yard, to make way for General Monk to come to the
House.  At the Hall we parted, and meeting Swan, he and I to the Swan and
drank our morning draft.  So back again to the Hall, where I stood upon
the steps and saw Monk go by, he making observance to the judges as he
went along.  At noon my father dined with me upon my turkey that was
brought from Denmark, and after dinner he and I to the Bull Head Tavern,
where we drank half a pint of wine and so parted.  I to Mrs. Ann, and Mrs.
Jem being gone out of the chamber she and I had a very high bout, I
rattled her up, she being in her bed, but she becoming more cool, we
parted pretty good friends.  Thence I went to Will's, where I staid at
cards till 10 o'clock, losing half a crown, and so home to bed.

7th.  In the morning I went early to give Mr. Hawly notice of my being
forced to go into London, but he having also business we left our office
business to Mr. Spicer and he and I walked as far as the Temple, where I
halted a little and then went to Paul's School, but it being too soon,
went and drank my morning draft with my cozen Tom Pepys the turner, and
saw his house and shop, thence to school, where he that made the speech
for the seventh form in praise of the founder, did show a book which Mr.
Crumlum had lately got, which is believed to be of the Founder's own
writing.  After all the speeches, in which my brother John came off as
well as any of the rest, I went straight home and dined, then to the Hall,
where in the Palace I saw Monk's soldiers abuse Billing and all the
Quakers, that were at a meeting-place there, and indeed the soldiers did
use them very roughly and were to blame.

     ["Fox, or some other 'weighty' friend, on hearing of this,
     complained to Monk, who issued the following order, dated March 9th:
     'I do require all officers and soldiers to forbear to disturb
     peaceable meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to
     the Parliament or the Commonwealth of England.  George Monk.'  This
     order, we are told, had an excellent effect on the soldiers."--A. C.
     Bickley's 'George Fox and the Early Quakers, London, 1884, p. 179.
     The Quakers were at this time just coming into notice.  The first
     preaching of George Fox, the founder, was in 1648, and in 1655 the
     preachers of the sect numbered seventy-three.  Fox computed that
     there were seldom less than a thousand quakers in prison.  The
     statute 13 and 14 Car. II.  cap. i. (1662) was "An act for
     preventing the mischiefs and dangers that may arise by certain
     persons called quakers and others, refusing to take lawful oaths."
     Billing is mentioned again on July 22nd, 1667, when he addressed
     Pepys in Westminster Hall.]

So after drinking with Mr. Spicer, who had received L600 for me this
morning, I went to Capt. Stone and with him by coach to the Temple Gardens
(all the way talking of the disease of the stone), where we met Mr. Squib,
but would do nothing till to-morrow morning.  Thence back on foot home,
where I found a letter from my Lord in character [private cryptic code
Ed.], which I construed, and after my wife had shewn me some ribbon and
shoes that she had taken out of a box of Mr. Montagu's which formerly Mr.
Kipps had left here when his master was at sea, I went to Mr. Crew and
advised with him about it, it being concerning my Lord's coming up to
Town, which he desires upon my advice the last week in my letter.  Thence
calling upon Mrs. Ann I went home, and wrote in character to my Lord in
answer to his letter.  This day Mr. Crew told me that my Lord St. John is
for a free Parliament, and that he is very great with Monk, who hath now
the absolute command and power to do any thing that he hath a mind to do.
Mr. Moore told me of a picture hung up at the Exchange of a great pair of
buttocks shooting of a turd into Lawson's mouth, and over it was wrote
"The thanks of the house."  Boys do now cry "Kiss my Parliament, instead
of "Kiss my [rump]," so great and general a contempt is the Rump come to
among all the good and bad.

8th.  A little practice on my flageolet, and afterwards walking in my yard
to see my stock of pigeons, which begin now with the spring to breed very
fast.  I was called on by Mr. Fossan, my fellow pupil at Cambridge, and I
took him to the Swan in the Palace yard, and drank together our morning
draft.  Thence to my office, where I received money, and afterwards Mr.
Carter, my old friend at Cambridge, meeting me as I was going out of my
office I took him to the Swan, and in the way I met with Captain Lidcott,
and so we three went together and drank there, the Captain talking as high
as ever he did, and more because of the fall of his brother Thurlow.

     [John Thurloe, born 1616; Secretary of State to Cromwell; M.P. for
     Ely, 1656, and for the University of Cambridge in Richard Cromwell's
     Parliament of December, 1658.  He was never employed after the
     Restoration, although the King solicited his services.  He died
     February 21st, 1668.  Pepys spells the name Thurlow, which was a
     common spelling at the time.]

Hence I went to Captain Stone, who told me how Squib had been with him,
and that he could do nothing with him, so I returned to Mr. Carter and
with him to Will's, where I spent upon him and Monsieur L'Impertinent,
alias Mr. Butler, who I took thither with me, and thence to a Rhenish wine
house, and in our way met with Mr. Hoole, where I paid for my cozen Roger
Pepys his wine, and after drinking we parted.  So I home, in my way
delivering a letter which among the rest I had from my Lord to-day to Sir
N. Wheeler.  At home my wife's brother brought her a pretty black dog
which I liked very well, and went away again.  Hence sending a porter with
the hamper of bottles to the Temple I called in my way upon Mrs. Jem, who
was much frighted till I came to tell her that her mother was well.  So to
the Temple, where I delivered the wine and received the money of my cos.
Roger that I laid out, and thence to my father's, where he shewed me a
base angry letter that he had newly received from my uncle Robert about my
brother John, at which my father was very sad, but I comforted him and
wrote an answer.  My brother John has an exhibition granted him from the
school.  My father and I went down to his kitchen, and there we eat and
drank, and about 9 o'clock I went away homewards, and in Fleet Street,
received a great jostle from a man that had a mind to take the wall, which
I could not help?

     [This was a constant trouble to the pedestrian until the rule of
     passing to the right of the person met was generally accepted.  Gay
     commences his "Trivia" with an allusion to this--

          "When to assert the wall, and when resign--"

     and the epigram on the haughty courtier and the scholar is well
     known.]

I came home and to bed.  Went to bed with my head not well by my too much
drinking to-day, and I had a boil under my chin which troubled me cruelly.

9th.  Soon as out of my bed I wrote letters into the country to go by
carrier to-day.  Before I was out of my bed, I heard the soldiers very
busy in the morning, getting their horses ready where they lay at
Hilton's, but I knew not then their meaning in so doing: After I had wrote
my letters I went to Westminster up and down the Hall, and with Mr. Swan
walked a good [deal] talking about Mr. Downing's business.  I went with
him to Mr. Phelps's house where he had some business to solicit, where we
met Mr. Rogers my neighbour, who did solicit against him and talked very
high, saying that he would not for a L1000 appear in a business that Swan
did, at which Swan was very angry, but I believe he might be guilty
enough.  In the Hall I understand how Monk is this morning gone into
London with his army; and met with Mr. Fage, who told me that he do
believe that Monk is gone to secure some of the Common-council of the
City, who were very high yesterday there, and did vote that they would not
pay any taxes till the House was filled up.  I went to my office, where I
wrote to my Lord after I had been at the Upper Bench,  where Sir Robert
Pye

     [Sir Robert Pye, the elder, was auditor of the Exchequer, and a
     staunch Royalist.  He garrisoned his house at Faringdon, which was
     besieged by his son, of the same names, a decided Republican, son-
     in-law to Hampden, and colonel of horse under Fairfax.  The son,
     here spoken of, was subsequently committed to the Tower for
     presenting a petition to the House of Commons from the county of
     Berks, which he represented in Parliament, complaining of the want
     of a settled form of government.  He had, however, the courage to
     move for an habeas corpus, but judge Newdigate decided that the
     courts of law had not the power to discharge him.  Upon Monk's
     coming to London, the secluded members passed a vote to liberate
     Pye, and at the Restoration he was appointed equerry to the King.
     He died in 1701.--B.]

this morning came to desire his discharge from the Tower; but it could not
be granted.  After that I went to Mrs. Jem, who I had promised to go along
with to her Aunt Wright's, but she was gone, so I went thither, and after
drinking a glass of sack I went back to Westminster Hall, and meeting with
Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who would needs take me home, where Mr. Lucy,
Burrell, and others dined, and after dinner I went home and to Westminster
Hall, where meeting Swan I went with him by water to the Temple to our
Counsel, and did give him a fee to make a motion to-morrow in the
Exchequer for Mr. Downing.  Thence to Westminster Hall, where I heard an
action very finely pleaded between my Lord Dorset and some other noble
persons, his lady and other ladies of quality being here, and it was
about; L330 per annum, that was to be paid to a poor Spittal, which was
given by some of his predecessors; and given on his side.  Thence Swan and
I to a drinking-house near Temple Bar, where while he wrote I played on my
flageolet till a dish of poached eggs was got ready for us, which we eat,
and so by coach home.  I called at Mr. Harper's, who told me how Monk had
this day clapt up many of the Common-council, and that the Parliament had
voted that he should pull down their gates and portcullisses, their posts
and their chains, which he do intend to do, and do lie in the City all
night.  I went home and got some ahlum to my mouth, where I have the
beginnings of a cancer, and had also a plaster to my boil underneath my
chin.

10th.  In the morning I went to Mr. Swan, who took me to the Court of
Wards,  where I saw the three Lords Commissioners sitting upon some cause
where Mr. Scobell was concerned, and my Lord Fountaine took him up very
roughly about some things that he said.  After that we went to the
Exchequer, where the Barons were hearing of causes, and there I made
affidavit that Mr. Downing was gone into Holland by order of the Council
of State, and this affidavit I gave to Mr. Stevens our lawyer.  Thence to
my office, where I got money of Mr. Hawly to pay the lawyer, and there
found Mr. Lenard, one of the Clerks of the Council, and took him to the
Swan and gave him his morning draft.  Then home to dinner, and after that
to the Exchequer, where I heard all the afternoon a great many causes
before the Barons; in the end came ours, and Squib proved clearly by his
patent that the house and office did now belong to him.  Our lawyer made
some kind of opposition, but to no purpose, and so the cause was found
against us, and the foreman of the jury brought in L10 damages, which the
whole Court cried shame of, and so he cried 12d.  Thence I went home,
vexed about this business, and there I found Mr. Moore, and with him went
into London to Mr. Fage about the cancer in my mouth, which begins to grow
dangerous, who gave me something for it, and also told me what Monk had
done in the City, how he had pulled down the most part of the gates and
chains that they could break down, and that he was now gone back to White
Hall.  The City look mighty blank, and cannot tell what in the world to
do; the Parliament having this day ordered that the Common-council sit no
more; but that new ones be chosen according to what qualifications they
shall give them.  Thence I went and drank with Mr. Moore at the Sugar Loaf
by Temple Bar, where Swan and I were last night, and so we parted.  At
home I found Mr. Hunt, who sat talking with me awhile, and so to bed.

11th.  This morning I lay long abed, and then to my office, where I read
all the morning my Spanish book of Rome.  At noon I walked in the Hall,
where I heard the news of a letter from Monk, who was now gone into the
City again, and did resolve to stand for the sudden filling up of the
House, and it was very strange how the countenance of men in the Hall was
all changed with joy in half an hour's time.  So I went up to the lobby,
where I saw the Speaker reading of the letter; and after it was read, Sir
A. Haselrigge came out very angry, and Billing--[The quaker mentioned
before on the 7th of this month.]--standing at the door, took him by the
arm, and cried, "Thou man, will thy beast carry thee no longer?  thou must
fall!"  The House presently after rose, and appointed to meet again at
three o'clock.  I went then down into the Hall, where I met with Mr.
Chetwind, who had not dined no more than myself, and so we went toward
London, in our way calling at two or three shops, but could have no
dinner.  At last, within Temple Bar, we found a pullet ready roasted, and
there we dined.  After that he went to his office in Chancery Lane,
calling at the Rolls, where I saw the lawyers pleading.  Then to his
office, where I sat in his study singing, while he was with his man (Mr.
Powell's son) looking after his business.  Thence we took coach for the
City to Guildhall, where the Hall was full of people expecting Monk and
Lord Mayor to come thither, and all very joyfull.  Here we stayed a great
while, and at last meeting with a friend of his we went to the 3 Tun
tavern and drank half a pint of wine, and not liking the wine we went to
an alehouse, where we met with company of this third man's acquaintance,
and there we drank a little.  Hence I went alone to Guildhall to see
whether Monk was come again or no, and met with him coming out of the
chamber where he had been with the Mayor and Aldermen, but such a shout I
never heard in all my life, crying out, "God bless your Excellence." Here
I met with Mr. Lock, and took him to an alehouse, and left him there to
fetch Chetwind; when we were come together, Lock told us the substance of
the letter that went from Monk to the Parliament; wherein, after
complaints that he and his officers were put upon such offices against the
City as they could not do with any content or honour, that there are many
members now in the House that were of the late tyrannical Committee of
Safety.  That Lambert and Vane are now in town, contrary to the vote of
Parliament.  That there were many in the House that do press for new oaths
to be put upon men; whereas we have more cause to be sorry for the many
oaths that we have already taken and broken.  That the late petition of
the fanatique people presented by Barebone, for the imposing of an oath
upon all sorts of people, was received by the House with thanks. That
therefore he [Monk] do desire that all writs for filling up of the House
be issued by Friday next, and that in the mean time, he would retire into
the City and only leave them guards for the security of the House and
Council.  The occasion of this was the order that he had last night to go
into the City and disarm them, and take away their charter; whereby he and
his officers say that the House had a mind to put them upon things that
should make them odious; and so it would be in their power to do what they
would with them.  He told us that they [the Parliament] had sent Scott and
Robinson to him [Monk] this afternoon, but he would not hear them.  And
that the Mayor and Aldermen had offered him their own houses for himself
and his officers; and that his soldiers would lack for nothing.  And
indeed I saw many people give the soldiers drink and money, and all along
in the streets cried, "God bless them!" and extraordinary good words.
Hence we went to a merchant's house hard by, where Lock wrote a note and
left, where I saw Sir Nich. Crisp, and so we went to the Star Tavern (Monk
being then at Benson's), where we dined and I wrote a letter to my Lord
from thence.  In Cheapside there was a great many bonfires, and Bow bells
and all the bells in all the churches as we went home were a-ringing.
Hence we went homewards, it being about ten o'clock.  But the common joy
that was every where to be seen!  The number of bonfires, there being
fourteen between St. Dunstan's and Temple Bar, and at Strand Bridge' I
could at one view tell thirty-one fires.  In King-street seven or eight;
and all along burning, and roasting, and drinking for rumps.  There being
rumps tied upon sticks and carried up and down.  The butchers at the May
Pole in the Strand rang a peal with their knives when they were going to
sacrifice their rump.  On Ludgate Hill there was one turning of the spit
that had a rump tied upon it, and another basting of it.  Indeed it was
past imagination, both the greatness and the suddenness of it.  At one end
of the street you would think there was a whole lane of fire, and so hot
that we were fain to keep still on the further side merely for heat.  We
came to the Chequers at Charing Cross, where Chetwind wrote a letter and I
gave him an account of what I had wrote for him to write.  Thence home and
sent my letters to the posthouse in London, and my wife and I (after Mr.
Hunt was gone, whom I found waiting at my house) went out again to show
her the fires, and after walking as far as the Exchange we returned and to
bed.

12th.  In the morning, it being Lord's day, Mr. Pierce came to me to
enquire how things go.  We drank our morning draft together and thence to
White Hall, where Dr. Hones preached; but I staid not to hear, but walking
in the court, I heard that Sir Arth. Haselrigge was newly gone into the
City to Monk, and that Monk's wife removed from White Hall last night.
Home again, where at noon came according to my invitation my cos. Thos.
Pepys and his partner and dined with me, but before dinner we went and
took a walk round the park, it being a most pleasant day as ever I saw.
After dinner we three went into London together, where I heard that Monk
had been at Paul's in the morning, and the people had shouted much at his
coming out of the church.  In the afternoon he was at a church in
Broad-street, whereabout he do lodge.  But not knowing how to see him we
went and walked half a hour in Moorfields, which were full of people, it
being so fine a day.  Here I took leave of them, and so to Paul's, where I
met with Mr. Kirton's' apprentice (the crooked fellow) and walked up and
down with him two hours, sometimes in the street looking for a tavern to
drink in, but not finding any open, we durst not knock; other times in the
churchyard, where one told me that he had seen the letter printed. Thence
to Mr. Turner's, where I found my wife, Mr. Edw. Pepys, and Roger' and Mr.
Armiger being there, to whom I gave as good an account of things as I
could, and so to my father's, where Charles Glascocke was overjoyed to see
how things are now; who told me the boys had last night broke Barebone's
windows.  Hence home, and being near home we missed our maid, and were at
a great loss and went back a great way to find her, but when we could not
see her we went homewards and found her there, got before us which we
wondered at greatly.  So to bed, where my wife and I had some high words
upon my telling her that I would fling the dog which her brother gave her
out of window if he [dirtied] the house any more.

13th.  To my office till noon, thence home to dinner, my mouth being very
bad of the cancer and my left leg beginning to be sore again.  After
dinner to see Mrs. Jem, and in the way met with Catan on foot in the
street and talked with her a little, so home and took my wife to my
father's.  In my way I went to Playford's, and for two books that I had
and 6s. 6d. to boot I had my great book of songs which he sells always for
r 4s.  At my father's I staid a while, while my mother sent her maid Bess
to Cheapside for some herbs to make a water for my mouth.  Then I went to
see Mr. Cumberland, and after a little stay with him I returned, and took
my wife home, where after supper to bed.  This day Monk was invited to
White Hall to dinner by my Lords; not seeming willing, he would not come.
I went to Mr. Fage from my father's, who had been this afternoon with
Monk, who do promise to live and die with the City, and for the honour of
the City; and indeed the City is very open-handed to the soldiers, that
they are most of them drunk all day, and have money given them.  He did
give me something for my mouth which I did use this night.

14th.  Called out in the morning by Mr. Moore, whose voice my wife hearing
in my dressing-chamber with me, got herself ready, and came down and
challenged him for her valentine, this being the day.

     [The practice of choosing valentines was very general at this time,
     but some of the best examples of the custom are found in this
     Diary.]

To Westminster Hall, there being many new remonstrances and declarations
from many counties to Monk and the City, and one coming from the North
from Sir Thomas Fairfax. Hence I took him to the Swan and gave him his
morning draft.  So to my office, where Mr. Hill of Worcestershire came to
see me and my partner in our office, with whom we went to Will's to drink.
At noon I went home and so to Mr. Crew's, but they had dined, and so I
went to see Mrs. Jem where I stayed a while, and home again where I stayed
an hour or two at my lute, and so forth to Westminster Hall, where I heard
that the Parliament hath now changed the oath so much talked of to a
promise; and that among other qualifications for the members that are to
be chosen, one is, that no man, nor the son of any man that hath been in
arms during the life of the father, shall be capable of being chosen to
sit in Parliament.  To Will's, where like a fool I staid and lost 6d. at
cards.  So home, and wrote a letter to my Lord by the post. So after
supper to bed.  This day, by an order of the House, Sir H. Vane was sent
out of town to his house in Lincolnshire.

15th.  Called up in the morning by Captain Holland and Captain Cuttance,
and with them to Harper's, thence to my office, thence with Mr. Hill of
Worcestershire to Will's, where I gave him a letter to Nan Pepys, and some
merry pamphlets against the Rump to carry to her into the country. So to
Mr. Crew's, where the dining room being full, Mr. Walgrave and I dined
below in the buttery by ourselves upon a good dish of buttered salmon.
Thence to Hering' the merchant about my Lord's Worcester money and back to
Paul's Churchyard, where I staid reading in Fuller's History of the Church
of England an hour or two, and so to my father's, where Mr. Hill came to
me and I gave him direction what to do at Worcester about the money.
Thence to my Lady Wright's and gave her a letter from my Lord privily.  So
to Mrs. Jem and sat with her, who dined at Mr. Crew's to-day, and told me
that there was at her coming away at least forty gentlemen (I suppose
members that were secluded, for Mr. Walgrave told me that there were about
thirty met there the last night) came dropping in one after another
thither.  Thence home and wrote into the country against to-morrow by the
carrier and so to bed.  At my father's I heard how my cousin Kate Joyce
had a fall yesterday from her horse and had some hurt thereby.  No news
to-day, but all quiet to see what the Parliament will do about the issuing
of the writs to-morrow for filling up of the House, according to Monk's
desire.

16th, In the morning at my lute.  Then came Shaw and Hawly, and I gave
them their morning draft at my house.  So to my office, where I wrote by
the carrier to my Lord and sealed my letter at Will's, and gave it old
East to carry it to the carrier's, and to take up a box of china oranges
and two little barrels of scallops at my house, which Captain Cuttance
sent to me for my Lord.  Here I met with Osborne and with Shaw and Spicer,
and we went to the Sun Tavern in expectation of a dinner, where we had
sent us only two trenchers-full of meat, at which we were very merry,
while in came Mr. Wade and his friend Capt. Moyse (who told us of his
hopes to get an estate merely for his name's sake), and here we staid till
seven at night, I winning a quart of sack of Shaw that one trencherfull
that was sent us was all lamb and he that it was veal.  I by having but
3d. in my pocket made shift to spend no more, whereas if I had had more I
had spent more as the rest did, so that I see it is an advantage to a man
to carry little in his pocket.  Home, and after supper, and a little at my
flute, I went to bed.

17th.  In the morning Tom that was my Lord's footboy came to see me and
had 10s. of me of the money which I have to keep of his.  So that now I
have but 35s. more of his.  Then came Mr. Hills the instrument maker, and
I consulted with him about the altering my lute and my viall.  After that
I went into my study and did up my accounts, and found that I am about;
L40 beforehand in the world, and that is all.  So to my office and from
thence brought Mr. Hawly home with me to dinner, and after dinner wrote a
letter to Mr. Downing about his business and gave it Hawly, and so went to
Mr. Gunning's to his weekly fast, and after sermon, meeting there with
Monsieur L'Impertinent, we went and walked in the park till it was dark. I
played on my pipe at the Echo, and then drank a cup of ale at Jacob's. So
to Westminster Hall, and he with me, where I heard that some of the
members of the House were gone to meet with some of the secluded members
and General Monk in the City.  Hence we went to White Hall, thinking to
hear more news, where I met with Mr. Hunt, who told me how Monk had sent
for all his goods that he had here into the City; and yet again he told
me, that some of the members of the House had this day laid in firing into
their lodgings at White Hall for a good while, so that we are at a great
stand to think what will become of things, whether Monk will stand to the
Parliament or no.  Hence Mons. L'Impertinent and I to Harper's, and there
drank a cup or two to the King, and to his fair sister Frances--[Frances
Butler, the great beauty, who is sometimes styled.  la belle
Boteler.]--good health, of whom we had much discourse of her not being
much the worse for the small pox, which she had this last summer.  So home
and to bed.  This day we are invited to my uncle Fenner's wedding feast,
but went not, this being the 27th year.

18th.  A great while at my vial and voice, learning to sing "Fly boy, fly
boy," without book.  So to my office, where little to do.  In the Hall I
met with Mr. Eglin and one Looker, a famous gardener, servant to my Lord
Salsbury, and among other things the gardener told a strange passage in
good earnest .  .  .  .  Home to dinner, and then went to my Lord's
lodgings to my turret there and took away most of my books, and sent them
home by my maid.  Thither came Capt.  Holland to me who took me to the
Half Moon tavern and Mr. Southorne, Blackburne's clerk.  Thence he took me
to the Mitre in Fleet Street, where we heard (in a room over the music
room) very plainly through the ceiling.  Here we parted and I to Mr.
Wotton's, and with him to an alehouse and drank while he told me a great
many stories of comedies that he had formerly seen acted, and the names of
the principal actors, and gave me a very good account of it.  Thence to
Whitehall, where I met with Luellin and in the clerk's chamber wrote a
letter to my Lord.  So home and to bed.  This day two soldiers were hanged
in the Strand for their late mutiny at Somerset-house.

19th (Lord's day).  Early in the morning I set my books that I brought
home yesterday up in order in my study.  Thence forth to Mr. Harper's to
drink a draft of purle,--[Purl is hot beer flavoured with wormwood or
other aromatic herbs.  The name is also given to hot beer flavoured with
gin, sugar, and ginger.]--whither by appointment Monsieur L'Impertinent,
who did intend too upon my desire to go along with me to St.
Bartholomew's, to hear one Mr. Sparks, but it raining very hard we went to
Mr. Gunning's and heard an excellent sermon, and speaking of the character
that the Scripture gives of Ann the mother of the blessed Virgin, he did
there speak largely in commendation of widowhood, and not as we do to
marry two or three wives or husbands, one after another. Here I met with
Mr. Moore, and went home with him to dinner, where he told me the
discourse that happened between the secluded members and the members of
the House, before Monk last Friday.  How the secluded said, that they did
not intend by coming in to express revenge upon these men, but only to
meet and dissolve themselves, and only to issue writs for a free
Parliament.  He told me how Haselrigge was afraid to have the candle
carried before him, for fear that the people seeing him, would do him
hurt; and that he is afraid to appear in the City.  That there is great
likelihood that the secluded members will come in, and so Mr. Crew and my
Lord are likely to be great men, at which I was very glad.  After diner
there was many secluded members come in to Mr. Crew, which, it being the
Lord's day, did make Mr. Moore believe that there was something
extraordinary in the business.  Hence home and brought my wife to Mr.
Mossum's to hear him, and indeed he made a very good sermon, but only too
eloquent for a pulpit.  Here Mr. L'Impertinent helped me to a seat. After
sermon to my father's; and fell in discourse concerning our going to
Cambridge the next week with my brother John.  To Mrs. Turner where her
brother, Mr. Edward Pepys, was there, and I sat a great while talking of
public business of the times with him.  So to supper to my Father's, all
supper talking of John's going to Cambridge.  So home, and it raining my
wife got my mother's French mantle and my brother John's hat, and so we
went all along home and to bed.

20th.  In the morning at my lute.  Then to my office, where my partner and
I made even our balance.  Took him home to dinner with me, where my
brother John came to dine with me.  After dinner I took him to my study at
home and at my Lord's, and gave him some books and other things against
his going to Cambridge.  After he was gone I went forth to Westminster
Hall, where I met with Chetwind, Simons, and Gregory.  And with them to
Marsh's at Whitehall to drink, and staid there a pretty while reading a
pamphlet well writ and directed to General Monk, in praise of the form of
monarchy which was settled here before the wars.

     [This pamphlet is among the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts
     (British Museum), and dated in MS.  this same day, February 20th--
     "A Plea for Limited Monarchy as it was established in this Nation
     before the late War.  In an Humble Address to his Excellency General
     Monck.  By a Zealot for the good old Laws of his Country, before any
     Faction or Caprice, with additions."  "An Eccho to the Plea for
     Limited Monarchy, &c.," was published soon afterwards.]

They told me how the Speaker Lenthall do refuse to sign the writs for
choice of new members in the place of the excluded; and by that means the
writs could not go out to-day.  In the evening Simons and I to the Coffee
Club, where nothing to do only I heard Mr. Harrington, and my Lord of
Dorset and another Lord, talking of getting another place as the Cockpit,
and they did believe it would come to something.  After a small debate
upon the question whether learned or unlearned subjects are the best the
Club broke up very poorly, and I do not think they will meet any more.
Hence with Vines, &c.  to Will's, and after a pot or two home, and so to
bed.

21st. In the morning going out I saw many soldiers going towards
Westminster, and was told that they were going to admit the secluded
members again.  So I to Westminster Hall, and in Chancery Row I saw about
twenty of them who had been at White Hall with General Monk, who came
thither this morning, and made a speech to them, and recommended to them a
Commonwealth, and against Charles Stuart.  They came to the House and went
in one after another, and at last the Speaker came.  But it is very
strange that this could be carried so private, that the other members of
the House heard nothing of all this, till they found them in the House,
insomuch that the soldiers that stood there to let in the secluded
members, they took for such as they had ordered to stand there to hinder
their coming in.  Mr. Prin came with an old basket-hilt sword on, and had
a great many great shouts upon his going into the Hall.  They sat till
noon, and at their coming out Mr. Crew saw me, and bid me come to his
house, which I did, and he would have me dine with him, which I did; and
he very joyful told me that the House had made General Monk, General of
all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that upon Monk's
desire, for the service that Lawson had lately done in pulling down the
Committee of Safety, he had the command of the Sea for the time being. He
advised me to send for my Lord forthwith, and told me that there is no
question that, if he will, he may now be employed again; and that the
House do intend to do nothing more than to issue writs, and to settle a
foundation for a free Parliament.  After dinner I back to Westminster Hall
with him in his coach.  Here I met with Mr. Lock and Pursell, Masters of
Music,--[Henry Purcell, father of the celebrated composer, was gentleman
of the Chapel Royal.]--and with them to the Coffee House, into a room next
the water, by ourselves, where we spent an hour or two till Captain Taylor
came to us, who told us, that the House had voted the gates of the City to
be made up again, and the members of the City that are in prison to be set
at liberty; and that Sir G. Booth's' case be brought into the House
to-morrow.  Here we had variety of brave Italian and Spanish songs, and a
canon for eight voices, which Mr. Lock had lately made on these words:
"Domine salvum fac Regem," an admirable thing.  Here also Capt. Taylor
began a discourse of something that he had lately writ about Gavelkind in
answer to one that had wrote a piece upon the same subject; and indeed
discovered a great deal of study in antiquity in his discourse.  Here out
of the window it was a most pleasant sight to see the City from one end to
the other with a glory about it, so high was the light of the bonfires,
and so thick round the City, and the bells rang everywhere.  Hence home
and wrote to my Lord, afterwards came down and found Mr. Hunt (troubled at
this change) and Mr. Spong, who staid late with me singing of a song or
two, and so parted. My wife not very well, went to bed before.  This
morning I met in the Hall with Mr. Fuller, of Christ's, and told him of my
design to go to Cambridge, and whither.  He told me very freely the temper
of Mr. Widdrington, how he did oppose all the fellows in the College, and
that there was a great distance between him and the rest, at which I was
very sorry, for that he told me he feared it would be little to my
brother's advantage to be his pupil.

22nd.  In the morning intended to have gone to Mr. Crew's to borrow some
money, but it raining I forbore, and went to my Lord's lodging and look
that all things were well there.  Then home and sang a song to my viall,
so to my office and to Will's, where Mr. Pierce found me out, and told me
that he would go with me to Cambridge, where Colonel Ayre's regiment, to
which he was surgeon, lieth.  Walking in the Hall, I saw Major-General
Brown, who had along time been banished by the Rump, but now with his
beard overgrown, he comes abroad and sat in the House.  To my father's to
dinner, where nothing but a small dish of powdered beef--[Boiled salt
beef.  To powder was to sprinkle with salt, and the powdering tub a vessel
in which meat was salted.]--and dish of carrots; they being all busy to
get things ready for my brother John to go to-morrow.  After dinner, my
wife staying there, I went to Mr. Crew's, and got; L5 of Mr. Andrews, and
so to Mrs. Jemimah, who now hath her instrument about her neck, and indeed
is infinitely, altered, and holds her head upright. I paid her, maid 40s.
of the money that I have received of Mr. Andrews. Hence home to my study,
where I only wrote thus much of this day's passages to this * and so out
again.  To White Hall, where I met with Will.  Simons and Mr. Mabbot at
Marsh's, who told me how the House had this day voted that the gates of
the City should be set up at the cost of the State.  And that
Major-General Brown's being proclaimed a traitor be made void, and several
other things of that nature.  Home for my lanthorn and so to my father's,
where I directed John what books to put for Cambridge.  After that to
supper, where my Uncle Fenner and my Aunt, The. Turner, and Joyce, at a
brave leg of veal roasted, and were very merry against John's going to
Cambridge.  I observed this day how abominably Barebone's windows are
broke again last night.  At past 9 o'clock my wife and I went home.

23rd.  Thursday, my birthday, now twenty-seven years.  A pretty fair
morning, I rose and after writing a while in my study I went forth.  To my
office, where I told Mr. Hawly of my thoughts to go out of town to-morrow.
Hither Mr. Fuller comes to me and my Uncle Thomas too, thence I took them
to drink, and so put off my uncle.  So with Mr. Fuller home to my house,
where he dined with me, and he told my wife and me a great many stories of
his adversities, since these troubles, in being forced to travel in the
Catholic countries, &c.  He shewed me his bills, but I had not money to
pay him.  We parted, and I to Whitehall, where I was to see my horse which
Mr. Garthwayt lends me to-morrow.  So home, where Mr. Pierce comes to me
about appointing time and place where and when to meet tomorrow.  So to
Westminster Hall, where, after the House rose, I met with Mr. Crew, who
told me that my Lord was chosen by 73 voices, to be one of the Council of
State.  Mr. Pierpoint had the most, 101, and himself the next, too.  He
brought me in the coach home.  He and Mr. Anslow being in it.  I back to
the Hall, and at Mrs. Michell's shop staid talking a great while with her
and my Chaplain, Mr. Mumford, and drank a pot or two of ale on a wager
that Mr. Prin is not of the Council.  Home and wrote to my Lord the news
of the choice of the Council by the post, and so to bed.

24th.  I rose very early, and taking horse at Scotland Yard, at Mr.
Garthwayt's stable, I rode to Mr. Pierces, who rose, and in a quarter of
an hour, leaving his wife in bed (with whom Mr. Lucy methought was very
free as she lay in bed), we both mounted, and so set forth about seven of
the clock, the day and the way very foul.  About Ware we overtook Mr.
Blayton, brother-in-law to Dick Vines, who went thenceforwards with us,
and at Puckeridge we baited, where we had a loin of mutton fried, and were
very merry, but the way exceeding bad from Ware thither.  Then up again
and as far as Foulmer, within six miles of Cambridge, my mare being almost
tired: here we lay at the Chequer, playing at cards till supper, which was
a breast of veal roasted.  I lay with Mr. Pierce, who we left here the
next morning upon his going to Hinchingbroke to speak with my Lord before
his going to London, and we two come to Cambridge by eight o'clock in the
morning.

25th.  To the Falcon, in the Petty Cury,

     [The old Falcon Inn is on the south side of Petty Cury.  It is now
     divided into three houses, one of which is the present Falcon Inn,
     the other two being houses with shops.  The Falcon yard is but
     little changed.  From the size of the whole building it must have
     been the principal inn of the town.  The room said to have been used
     by Queen Elizabeth for receptions retains its original form.--M. B.

     The Petty Cury.  The derivation of the name of this street, so well
     known to all Cambridge men, is a matter of much dispute among
     antiquaries.  (See "Notes and Queries.") The most probable meaning
     of it is the Parva Cokeria, or little cury, where the cooks of the
     town lived, just as "The Poultry," where the Poulters (now
     Poulterers) had their shops.  "The Forme of Cury," a Roll of Antient
     English Cookery, was compiled by the principal cooks of that "best
     and royalest viander of all Christian Kings," Richard the Second,
     and edited with a copious Index and Glossary by Dr. Samuel Pegge,
     1780.--M. B.]

where we found my father and brother very well.  After dressing myself,
about ten o'clock, my father, brother, and I to Mr. Widdririgton, at
Christ's College, who received us very civilly, and caused my brother to
be admitted, while my father, he, and I, sat talking.  After that done, we
take leave.  My father and brother went to visit some friends, Pepys's,
scholars in Cambridge, while I went to Magdalene College, to Mr. Hill,
with whom I found Mr. Zanchy, Burton, and Hollins, and was exceeding
civilly received by them.  I took leave on promise to sup with them, and
to my Inn again, where I dined with some others that were there at an
ordinary.  After dinner my brother to the College, and my father and I to
my Cozen Angier's, to see them, where Mr. Fairbrother came to us.  Here we
sat a while talking.  My father he went to look after his things at the
carrier's, and my brother's chamber, while Mr. Fairbrother, my Cozen
Angier, and Mr. Zanchy, whom I met at Mr. Merton's shop (where I bought
'Elenchus Motuum', having given my former to Mr. Downing when he was
here), to the Three Tuns, where we drank pretty hard and many healths to
the King, &c., till it began to be darkish: then we broke up and I and Mr.
Zanchy went to Magdalene College, where a very handsome supper at Mr.
Hill's chambers, I suppose upon a club among them, where in their
discourse I could find that there was nothing at all left of the old
preciseness in their discourse, specially on Saturday nights.  And Mr.
Zanchy told me that there was no such thing now-a-days among them at any
time.  After supper and some discourse then to my Inn, where I found my
father in his chamber, and after some discourse, and he well satisfied
with this day's work, we went to bed, my brother lying with me, his things
not being come by the carrier that he could not lie in the College.

26th (Sunday).  My brother went to the College to Chapel.  My father and I
went out in the morning, and walked out in the fields behind King's
College, and in King's College Chapel Yard, where we met with Mr.
Fairbrother, who took us to Botolph's Church, where we heard Mr. Nicholas,
of Queen's College, who I knew in my time to be Tripos,

     [The Tripos or Bachelor of the Stool, who made the speech on Ash
     Wednesday, when the senior Proctor called him up and exhorted him to
     be witty but modest withal.  Their speeches, especially after the
     Restoration, tended to be boisterous, and even scurrilous.
     "26 Martii 1669.  Da Hollis, fellow of Clare Hall is to make a
     publick Recantation in the Bac. Schools for his Tripos speeche."
     The Tripos verses still come out, and are circulated on Ash
     Wednesday.  The list of successful candidates for honours is printed
     on the same paper, hence the term "Tripos" applied to it.]

with great applause, upon this text, "For thy commandments are broad."
Thence my father and I to Mr. Widdrington's chamber to dinner, where he
used us very courteously again, and had two Fellow Commoners at table with
him, and Mr. Pepper, a Fellow of the College.  After dinner, while we sat
talking by the fire, Mr. Pierces man came to tell me that his master was
come to town, so my father and I took leave, and found Mr. Pierce at our
Inn, who told us that he had lost his journey, for my Lord was gone from
Hinchingbroke to London on Thursday last, at which I was a little put to a
stand.  So after a cup of drink I went to Magdalene College to get the
certificate of the College for my brother's entrance there, that he might
save his year.  I met with Mr. Burton in the Court, who took me to Mr.
Pechell's chamber, where he was and Mr. Zanchy.  By and by, Mr. Pechell
and Sanchy and I went out, Pechell to Church, Sanchy and I to the Rose
Tavern, where we sat and drank till sermon done, and then Mr. Pechell came
to us, and we three sat drinking the King's and his whole family's health
till it began to be dark.  Then we parted; Sanchy and I went to my
lodging, where we found my father and Mr. Pierce at the door, and I took
them both and Mr. Blayton to the Rose Tavern, and there gave them a quart
or two of wine, not telling them that we had been there before.  After
this we broke up, and my father, Mr. Zanchy, and I to my Cosen Angier to
supper, where I caused two bottles of wine to be carried from the Rose
Tavern; that was drunk up, and I had not the wit to let them know at table
that it was I that paid for them, and so I lost my thanks for them.  After
supper Mr. Fairbrother, who supped there with us, took me into a room by
himself, and shewed me a pitiful copy of verses upon Mr. Prinn which he
esteemed very good, and desired that I would get them given to Mr. Prinn,
in hopes that he would get him some place for it, which I said I would do,
but did laugh in my sleeve to think of his folly, though indeed a man that
has always expressed great civility to me.  After that we sat down and
talked; I took leave of all my friends, and so to my Inn, where after I
had wrote a note and enclosed the certificate to Mr. Widdrington, I bade
good night to my father, and John went to bed, but I staid up a little
while, playing the fool with the lass of the house at the door of the
chamber, and so to bed.

27th.  Up by four o'clock, and after I was ready, took my leave of my
father, whom I left in bed, and the same of my brother John, to whom I
gave 10s.  Mr. Blayton and I took horse and straight to Saffron Walden,
where at the White Hart, we set up our horses, and took the master of the
house to shew us Audley End House, who took us on foot through the park,
and so to the house, where the housekeeper shewed us all the house, in
which the stateliness of the ceilings, chimney-pieces, and form of the
whole was exceedingly worth seeing.  He took us into the cellar, where we
drank most admirable drink, a health to the King.  Here I played on my
flageolette, there being an excellent echo.  He shewed us excellent
pictures; two especially, those of the four Evangelists and Henry VIII.
After that I gave the man 2s. for his trouble, and went back again.  In
our going, my landlord carried us through a very old hospital or
almshouse, where forty poor people was maintained; a very old foundation;
and over the chimney in the mantelpiece was an inscription in brass:
"Orate pre anima Thomae Bird," &c.; and the poor box also was on the same
chimney-piece, with an iron door and locks to it, into which I put 6d.
They brought me a draft of their drink in a brown bowl, tipt with silver,
which I drank off, and at the bottom was a picture of the Virgin and the
child in her arms, done in silver.  So we went to our Inn, and after
eating of something, and kissed the daughter of the house, she being very
pretty, we took leave, and so that night, the road pretty good, but the
weather rainy to Ep[p]ing, where we sat and played a game at cards, and
after supper, and some merry talk with a plain bold maid of the house, we
went to bed.

28th.  Up in the morning, and had some red herrings to our breakfast,
while my boot-heel was a-mending, by the same token the boy left the hole
as big as it was before.  Then to horse, and for London through the
forest, where we found the way good, but only in one path, which we kept
as if we had rode through a canal all the way.  We found the shops all
shut, and the militia of the red regiment in arms at the Old Exchange,
among whom I found and spoke to Nich. Osborne, who told me that it was a
thanksgiving-day through the City for the return of the Parliament.  At
Paul's I light, Mr. Blayton holding my horse, where I found Dr. Reynolds'
in the pulpit, and General Monk there, who was to have a great
entertainment at Grocers' Hall.  So home, where my wife and all well.
Shifted myself,--[Changed his dress.]--and so to Mr. Crew's, and then to
Sir Harry Wright's, where I found my Lord at dinner, who called for me in,
and was glad to see me.  There was at dinner also Mr. John Wright and his
lady, a very pretty lady, Alderman Allen's daughter.  I dined here with
Will. Howe, and after dinner went out with him to buy a hat (calling in my
way and saw my mother), which we did at the Plough in Fleet Street by my
Lord's direction, but not as for him.  Here we met with Mr. Pierce a
little before, and he took us to the Greyhound Tavern, and gave us a pint
of wine, and as the rest of the seamen do, talked very high again of my
Lord.  After we had done about the hat we went homewards, he to Mr. Crew's
and I to Mrs. Jem, and sat with her a little.  Then home, where I found
Mr. Sheply, almost drunk, come to see me, afterwards Mr. Spong comes, with
whom I went up and played with him a Duo or two, and so good night.  I was
indeed a little vexed with Mr. Sheply, but said nothing, about his
breaking open of my study at my house, merely to give him the key of the
stair door at my Lord's, which lock he might better have broke than mine.

29th.  To my office, and drank at Will's with Mr. Moore, who told me how
my Lord is chosen General at Sea by the Council, and that it is thought
that Monk will be joined with him therein.  Home and dined, after dinner
my wife and I by water to London, and thence to Herring's, the merchant in
Coleman Street, about L50 which he promises I shall have on Saturday next.
So to my mother's, and then to Mrs. Turner's, of whom I took leave, and
her company, because she was to go out of town to-morrow with Mr. Pepys
into Norfolk.  Here my cosen Norton gave me a brave cup of metheglin,

     [A liquor made of honey and water, boiled and fermenting.  By 12
     Charles II.  cap. 23, a grant of certain impositions upon beer, ale,
     and other liquors, a duty of 1d.  per gallon was laid upon "all
     metheglin or mead."]

the first I ever drank.  To my mother's and supped there.

She shewed me a letter to my father from my uncle inviting him to come to
Brampton while he is in the country.  So home and to bed.  This day my
Lord came to the House, the first time since he came to town; but he had
been at the Council before.